Fix #6288 (#22710)
dotnet/docs: docs/csharp/programming-guide/concepts/expression-trees/how-to-use-expression-trees-to-build-dynamic-queries.md

---
title: "Querying based on runtime state (C#)"
description: Describes various techniques your code can use to query dynamically depending on runtime state, by varying either LINQ method calls or the expression trees passed into those methods.

> ms.date: 07/20/2015

Reviewer: With the work you've done, we should update the date:

```suggestion
ms.date: 02/11/2021
```

* <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable.Provider>&mdash;an instance of a LINQ provider, which knows how to materialize the current query into a value or set of values.

In the context of dynamic querying, the provider will usually remain the same; the expression tree of the query will differ from query to query.

Expression trees are immutable; if you want a different expression tree&mdash;and thus a different query&mdash;you'll need to translate the existing expression tree to a new one, and thus to a new <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable>.

The following sections describe specific techniques for querying differently in response to runtime state:

- Use runtime state from within the expression tree
- Call additional LINQ methods
- Vary the expression tree passed into the LINQ methods
- Construct an [Expression\<TDelegate>](xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression%601) expression tree using the factory methods at <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression>
- Adding method call nodes to an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable>'s expression tree

> - Construct strings, and use the [Dynamic LINQ library](dynamic-linq.net/)

Reviewer: This link is not valid. I think this is what you meant:

```suggestion
- Construct strings, and use the [Dynamic LINQ library](https://dynamic-linq.net/)
```

You can replace the original query with the result of an [IQueryable\<T>](xref:System.Linq.IQueryable%601)-returning method, to get a new query. You can do this based on runtime state, as in the following example:

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../../../samples/snippets/csharp/programming-guide/dynamic-linq-expression-trees/Program.cs" id="Added_method_calls":::

## Vary the expression tree passed into the LINQ methods

You can pass in different expressions to the LINQ methods, depending on runtime state:

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../../../samples/snippets/csharp/programming-guide/dynamic-linq-expression-trees/Program.cs" id="Varying_expressions":::

You might also want to compose the various sub-expressions using a third-party library such as [LinqKit](http://www.albahari.com/nutshell/linqkit.aspx)'s [PredicateBuilder](http://www.albahari.com/nutshell/predicatebuilder.aspx):

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../../../samples/snippets/csharp/programming-guide/dynamic-linq-expression-trees/Program.cs" id="Compose_expressions":::

## Construct expression trees and queries using factory methods

> In all the examples up to this point, we've known the element type at compile time&mdash;`string`&mdash;and thus the type of the query&mdash;`IQueryable<string>`. You may need to add components to a query of any element type; you may need to add different components, depending on the element type. You can create expression trees from the ground up, using the factory methods at <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression?displayProperty=fullName>, and thus tailor the expression to a specific element type.

Reviewer: split these into two sentences.

```suggestion
In all the examples up to this point, we've known the element type at compile time&mdash;`string`&mdash;and thus the type of the query&mdash;`IQueryable<string>`. You may need to add components to a query of any element type. You may need to add different components, depending on the element type. You can create expression trees from the ground up, using the factory methods at <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression?displayProperty=fullName>, and thus tailor the expression to a specific element type.
```

### Scenario

Let's say you have multiple entity types:

```csharp
record Person(string LastName, string FirstName, DateTime DateOfBirth);
record Car(string Model, int Year);
```

For any of these entity types, you want to filter and return only those entities that have a given text inside one of their `string` fields. For `Person`, you'd want to search the `FirstName` and `LastName` properties:

```csharp
string term = /* ... */;
var personsQry = new List<Person>()
    .AsQueryable()
    .Where(x => x.FirstName.Contains(term) || x.LastName.Contains(term));
```

but for `Car`, you'd want to search only the `Model` property:

```csharp
string term = /* ... */;
var carsQry = new List<Car>()
    .AsQueryable()
    .Where(x => x.Model.Contains(term));
```

While you could write one custom function for `IQueryable<Person>` and another for `IQueryable<Car>`, the following function adds this filtering to any existing query, irrespective of the specific element type.

### Example

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../../../samples/snippets/csharp/programming-guide/dynamic-linq-expression-trees/Program.cs" id="Factory_methods_expression_of_tdelegate":::

> Note that because the `TextFilter` function takes and returns an [IQueryable\<T>](xref:System.Linq.IQueryable%601) (and not just an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable>), you can add further compile-time-typed query elements after the text filter.

Reviewer: simplify:

```suggestion
Because the `TextFilter` function takes and returns an [IQueryable\<T>](xref:System.Linq.IQueryable%601) (and not just an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable>), you can add further compile-time-typed query elements after the text filter.
```

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../../../samples/snippets/csharp/programming-guide/dynamic-linq-expression-trees/Program.cs" id="Factory_methods_expression_of_tdelegate_usage":::

## Adding method call nodes to the <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable>'s expression tree

> If all you have is an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable> and not an [IQueryable\<T>](xref:System.Linq.IQueryable%601), you can't directly call the generic LINQ methods at <xref:System.Linq.Queryable>. One alternative is to build the inner expression tree as above, and use reflection to invoke the appropriate LINQ method while passing in the expression tree.

Reviewer: simplify:

```suggestion
If you have an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable> instead of an [IQueryable\<T>](xref:System.Linq.IQueryable%601), you can't directly call the generic LINQ methods. One alternative is to build the inner expression tree as above, and use reflection to invoke the appropriate LINQ method while passing in the expression tree.
```

You could also duplicate the LINQ method's functionality, by wrapping the entire tree in a <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.MethodCallExpression> which represents a call to the LINQ method:

:::code language="csharp" source="../../../../../samples/snippets/csharp/programming-guide/dynamic-linq-expression-trees/Program.cs" id="Factory_methods_lambdaexpression":::

> Note that in this case you don't have a compile-time `T` generic placeholder, so you'll use the <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression.Lambda%2A> overload which doesn't require compile-time type information, and which produces only a <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.LambdaExpression> instead of an an [Expression\<TDelegate>](xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression%601).

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
Note that in this case you don't have a compile-time `T` generic placeholder, so you'll use the <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression.Lambda%2A> overload which doesn't require compile-time type information, and which produces a <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.LambdaExpression> instead of an an [Expression\<TDelegate>](xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression%601).
```

description: Describes various techniques your code can use to query dynamically depending on runtime state, by varying either LINQ method calls or the expression trees passed into those methods.
ms.date: 07/20/2015
ms.assetid: 52cd44dd-a3ec-441e-b93a-4eca388119c7
---
# Querying based on runtime state (C#)

Consider code that defines an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable%601> or an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable> against a data source:

```csharp
var companyNames = new[] {
    "Consolidated Messenger", "Alpine Ski House", "Southridge Video",
    "City Power & Light", "Coho Winery", "Wide World Importers",
    "Graphic Design Institute", "Adventure Works", "Humongous Insurance",
    "Woodgrove Bank", "Margie's Travel", "Northwind Traders",
    "Blue Yonder Airlines", "Trey Research", "The Phone Company",
    "Wingtip Toys", "Lucerne Publishing", "Fourth Coffee"
};

// We're using an in-memory array as the data source, but the IQueryable could have come
// from anywhere -- an ORM backed by a database, a web request, or any other LINQ provider.
IQueryable<string> companyNamesSource = companyNames.AsQueryable();

var qry = companyNames.OrderBy(x => x);
```

> Every time you run this code, the same exact query will be executed. This is frequently not very useful, as you may want your code to execute different queries under varying conditions. This topic describes how you can execute a different query based on runtime state.

Reviewer: nit: topic -> article

```suggestion
Every time you run this code, the same exact query will be executed. This is frequently not very useful, as you may want your code to execute different queries under varying conditions. This article describes how you can execute a different query based on runtime state.
```

## IQueryable, IQueryable\<T> and expression trees

Fundamentally, an <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable> has two components:

* <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable.Expression>&mdash;a language- and datasource-agnostic representation of the current query's elements, in the form of an expression tree.

> * <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable.Provider>&mdash;an object which knows how to translate the current query into actual .NET objects, a.k.a. an instance of a LINQ provider.

Reviewer: I'd leave off "into actual .NET objects", and avoid "a.k.a":

```suggestion
* <xref:System.Linq.IQueryable.Provider>&mdash;an object which knows how to translate the current query. The provider is an instance of a LINQ provider.
```

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

In the context of dynamic querying, the provider will usually remain the same; the expression tree of the query will be different from query to query.

Because expression trees are immutable, if you want a different expression tree&mdash;and thus a different query&mdash;you'll need to translate the existing expression tree to a new one, and thus to a new **IQueryable**.

The following sections describe specific techniques for querying differently in response to runtime state:

- Referencing runtime state directly in the expression tree
- Calling additional LINQ methods
- Varying the expression tree passed into the LINQ methods
- Constructing expression trees using the factory methods at <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression>

## Referencing runtime state from the expression tree

> Assuming the LINQ provider supports it, the simplest way to query dynamically is to reference the runtime state directly in the query, via a closed-over variable:

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

```csharp
var length = 1;
var qry = companyNamesSource
    .Select(x => x.Substring(0, length))
    .Distinct();
    
Console.WriteLine(string.Join(",", qry));
// prints: C, A, S, W, G, H, M, N, B, T, L, F

length = 2;
Console.WriteLine(string.Join(",", qry));
// prints: Co, Al, So, Ci, Wi, Gr, Ad, Hu, Wo, Ma, No, Bl, Tr, Th, Lu, Fo 
```

> Note that the expression tree hasn't been modified; the query returns different values only because the value of `length` has been changed.

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
The expression tree hasn't been modified; the query returns different values only because the value of `length` has been changed.
```

> ## Calling additional LINQ methods

Reviewer: nit: gerund verbs are hard to translate:

```suggestion
## Call additional LINQ methods
```

> The LINQ methods on <xref:System.Linq.Queryable> which don't execute the query but rather return a new translated query object, generally consist of two steps:

Reviewer: simplify sentence form:

```suggestion
The LINQ methods on <xref:System.Linq.Queryable> don't execute the query but rather return a new translated query object. `Queryable` methods generally consist of two steps:
```

Author: I'm trying to differentiate here between Queryable methods that return a value (via the provider.Execute) method, and methods that return a new query object (via the provider.CreateQuery) method. I'll edit this.

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

> * wrap the current expression tree in a <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.MethodCallExpression> representing the method call, and
> * pass the newly wrapped expression tree back into the provider for optional additional processing.

Reviewer: use complete sentences:

```suggestion
* Wrap the current expression tree in a <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.MethodCallExpression> representing the method call.
* Pass the newly wrapped expression tree back into the provider for optional additional processing.
```

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

> For example, the source code for <xref:System.Linq.Queryable.Take> looks something like this:

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
For example, the source code for <xref:System.Linq.Queryable.Take> looks something like the following example:
```

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73 (I've edited out the entire `Take` source).

```csharp
public static IQueryable<TSource> Take<TSource>(this IQueryable<TSource> source, int count) {

    // wrap the original expression in a MethodCallExpression using the Call factory method    
    var wrapped =
        Expression.Call(
            null,

>             CachedReflectionInfo.Take_TSource_2(typeof(TSource)),

Reviewer: This type and method is not defined in this article. You also don't tie its use to the later example that composes a new query. We need to explain more about that process in this section.

Author: Agreed.

I'm trying to emphasize the idea that the `IQueryable<T>`-returnning methods do nothing more than translate one query object into another, by showing the [source](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/src/libraries/System.Linq.Queryable/src/System/Linq/Queryable.cs#L380) for `Queryable.Take`. The problem is, it's very hard to see this behind the exception handling and caching code.

I'll edit this out in a later commit.

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

            // the original expression
            source.Expression, 

            Expression.Constant(count)
        )

    // pass the wrapped expression back to the provider
    var newQuery = source.Provider.CreateQuery<TSource>(wrapped);

    return newQuery;
}
```

Thus, based on runtime state, you can conditionally replace the original query object with the result of these method calls, to get a new query.

```csharp
bool sortByLength = /* ... */;

var qry = companyNamesSource;
if (sortByLength) {
    qry = qry.OrderBy(x => x.Length);
}
```

> ## Varying the expression tree passed into the LINQ methods

Reviewer: verb form again:

```suggestion
## Vary the expression tree passed into the LINQ methods
```

> You can also choose to pass in different expressions to the LINQ methods, depending on runtime state:

Reviewer: simplify:

```suggestion
You can pass in different expressions to the LINQ methods, depending on runtime state:
```

```csharp
string startsWith = /* ... */;
string endsWith = /* ... */;

Expression<Func<string, bool>>? expr = null;
if (!string.IsNullOrEmpty(startsWith) && !string.IsNullOrEmpty(endsWith)) {
    expr = x => x.StartsWith(startsWith) || x.EndsWith(endsWith);
} else if (!string.IsNullOrEmpty(startsWith)) {
    expr = x => x.StartsWith(startsWith);
} else if (!string.IsNullOrEmpty(endsWith)) {
    expr = x => x.EndsWith(endsWith);
} else {
    expr = x => true;

> }

Reviewer: I haven't refactored this, but I think this could be made more clear with a pattern matching `switch` expression over the tuple `(startsWith, endsWith)`.

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

var qry = companyNamesSource.Where(expr);
```

You might also want to compose the various sub-expressions using a third-party library such as [LinqKit](http://www.albahari.com/nutshell/linqkit.aspx)'s [PredicateBuilder](http://www.albahari.com/nutshell/predicatebuilder.aspx):

```csharp
// This is functionally equivalent to the previous example.

string startsWith = /* ... */;
string endsWith = /* ... */;

Expression<Func<string, bool>>? expr = PredicateBuilder.New<string>(true);
if (!string.IsNullOrEmpty(startsWith)) {
    expr = expr.Or(x => x.StartsWith(startsWith));
}
if (!string.IsNullOrEmpty(endsWith)) {
    expr = expr.Or(x => x.EndsWith(endsWith));
}

var qry = companyNamesSource.Where(expr);
```

> ## Constructing expression trees and queries using factory methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Construct expression trees and queries using factory methods
```

> In all the examples up to this point, we've known the element type at compile time&mdash;`string`&mdash;and thus the type of the query&mdash;`IQueryable<string>`. But what if you want to add components to a query without limiting yourself to a specific element type? And moreover, what if the components you want to add are different depending on the type?

Reviewer: restate as statements, not questions:

```suggestion
In all the examples up to this point, we've known the element type at compile time&mdash;`string`&mdash;and thus the type of the query&mdash;`IQueryable<string>`. You may need to add components to a query without limiting yourself to a specific element type. You may want to add are different components depending on the type.
```

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

> To do this, you must create the expression trees from the ground up, using the factory methods at <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression>.

Reviewer: I'd also combine this with the previous paragraph:

```suggestion
You create the expression trees from the ground up, using the factory methods at <xref:System.Linq.Expressions.Expression>.
```

Author: Fixed in cc6550ea6ce39020e8838d4ff08fb2fb59232a73

For example, let's say you have multiple entity types:

```csharp
record Person(string LastName, string FirstName, DateTime DateOfBirth);
record Car(string Model, int Year);
```

> and for any of these entity types, you want to filter and return only those entities that have a given text inside one of their `string` fields. For `Person`, we'd want to search the `FirstName` and `LastName` properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any of these entity types, you want to filter and return only those entities that have a given text inside one of their `string` fields. For `Person`, we'd want to search the `FirstName` and `LastName` properties:
```
